Document the Export Import Usage #1047 (#1048)
IBM/FHIR: docs/src/pages/guides/FHIRBulkOperations.md

---
layout: post
title: FHIR Bulk Data Guide
description: FHIR Bulk Data Guide
date:   2020-05-08 09:00:00 -0500
permalink: /FHIRBulkOperations/
---

# Overview

The IBM FHIR Server has extended operations for Bulk Data `$import` and `$export`, which are implemented in the modules: 

|Module|Description|
|---|---|
|[fhir-operation-bulkdata](https://github.com/IBM/FHIR/tree/master/fhir-operation-bulkdata)|Implements the FHIR Operations `$import` and `$export` and translate bulk data requests into JSR352 Java Batch jobs|
|[fhir-bulkimportexport-webapp](https://github.com/IBM/FHIR/tree/master/fhir-bulkimportexport-webapp)|Standalone web application to process bulk data requests as JSR352 Java Batch jobs|

The IBM FHIR Server bulk data module configuration is described in more detail at the [FHIR Server Users Guide](https://ibm.github.io/FHIR/guides/FHIRServerUsersGuide/#410-bulk-data-operations).

## Export Operation: $export
The `$export` operation uses three OperationDefinition: 
- [System](http://hl7.org/fhir/uv/bulkdata/STU1/OperationDefinition-export.html) - Export data from the server. Exports to an S3-compatible data store.

> - [Patient](http://hl7.org/fhir/uv/bulkdata/STU1/OperationDefinition-patient-export.html) - An instance level execution, Obtain a set of resources pertaining to all patients. exports to an S3-compatible data store.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Patient](http://hl7.org/fhir/uv/bulkdata/STU1/OperationDefinition-patient-export.html) - Obtain a set of resources pertaining to all patients. Exports to an S3-compatible data store.
```

- [Group](http://hl7.org/fhir/uv/bulkdata/STU1/ OperationDefinition-group-export.html) - Obtain a set resources pertaining to patients in a specific Group. Only supports static membership; does not resolve inclusion/exclusion criteria.

### **$export: Create a Bulk Data Request**
To create an import request, the IBM FHIR Server requires the body fields of the request object to be a FHIR Resource `Parameters` JSON Object.  The request must be posted to the server using `POST`. Each request is limited to a single resource type in each imported or referenced file.

#### Example Request - GET
The following is a request to export data to the IBM COS endpoint from the IBM FHIR Server using GET.

```sh

> curl -u "fhiruser:change-password" -k -H "Content-Type: application/fhir+json" -X GET 'https://localhost:9443/fhir-server/api/v4/$export?_outputFormat=application/fhir%2Bndjson&_type=Patient' -v

Reviewer: totally just a preference thing, but i prefer the `-k` to be the first flag so its more prominent (since its not great practice...but so handy)
```suggestion
curl -k -u "fhiruser:change-password" -H "Content-Type: application/fhir+json" -X GET 'https://localhost:9443/fhir-server/api/v4/$export?_outputFormat=application/fhir%2Bndjson&_type=Patient' -v
```
Totally feel free to close/ignore this.

```

#### Example Request - POST
The following is a request to export data to the IBM COS endpoint from the IBM FHIR Server using POST and FHIR Resource Parameters.

```sh

> curl -u "fhiruser:change-password" -k -H "Content-Type: application/fhir+json" -X POST 'https://localhost:9443/fhir-server/api/v4/$export' -d '{

Reviewer: same as above
```suggestion
curl -k -u "fhiruser:change-password" -H "Content-Type: application/fhir+json" -X POST 'https://localhost:9443/fhir-server/api/v4/$export' -d '{
```

    "resourceType": "Parameters",
    "id": "e33a6a4e-29b5-4f62-a3e9-8d09f50ae54d",
    "parameter": [
        {
            "name": "_outputFormat",
            "valueString": "application/fhir+ndjson"
        },
        {
            "name": "_since",
            "valueInstant": "2019-01-01T08:21:26.94-04:00"
        },
        {
            "name": "_type",
            "valueString": "Observation,Condition"
        }
    ]
}'
```

## Import Operation: $import

The `$import` operation is System operation are invoked at `[base]/$import`.  The Import Operation uses a custom crafted OperationDefinition [link](https://github.com/IBM/FHIR/blob/master/fhir-operation-bulkdata/src/main/resources/import.json), which follows the proposal from [Smart-on-FHIR: import.md](https://github.com/smart-on-fhir/bulk-import/blob/master/import.md).

### **$import: Create a Bulk Data Request**

> To create an import request, the IBM FHIR Server requires the body fields of the request object to be a FHIR Resource `Parameters` JSON Object.  The request must be posted to the server using `POST`. Each request is limited to a single resource type in each imported or referenced file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create an import request, the IBM FHIR Server requires the body fields of the request object to be a FHIR Resource `Parameters` JSON Object.  The request must be posted to the server using `POST`. Each input url in the request is limited to a single resource type.
```

> The IBM FHIR Server limits the number of inputs per each `$import` request based on `fhirServer/bulkdata/maxInputPerRequest`, which defaults to 5 input entries.

Reviewer: I still think it would be nice if we supported many more inputs in a request and had the smarts to just do 5 at a time... do we have an issue open for that?

Author: Yes - https://github.com/IBM/FHIR/issues/948 - my thought is to split them into separate job paramters

Reviewer: perfect, just wanted to make sure we were tracking it.

The IBM FHIR Server supports an additional `storageDetail.type` with the value of `ibm-cos`.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
To import using the $import on https, one must additionally configure the fhirServer/bulkdata/validBaseUrls. For example, if one stores bulkdata on https://test-url.ibm.com/folder1 and https://test-url.ibm.com/folder2 you must specify both baseUrls. Please refer to the [IBM FHIR Server User's Guide](https://ibm.github.io/FHIR/guides/FHIRServerUsersGuide#410-bulk-data-operations)

```

> The IBM FHIR Server supports an additional `storageDetail.type` with the value of `ibm-cos`.

Reviewer: are there any other types supported?

Author: Yes, 
```suggestion
The IBM FHIR Server supports `storageDetail.type` with the value of `ibm-cos`, `https` and `aws-s3`.
```

Author: clarified

> The IBM FHIR Server supports an additional `storageDetail.type` with the value of `ibm-cos`.

Reviewer: I think its worth mentioning that the server administrator can whitelist base urls to import from...maybe with a link to the corresponding section from the User's Guide

Author: done

#### Example Request
The following is a request to load data from the IBM COS endpoint into the IBM FHIR Server.

``` sh
curl -k -v -X POST -u "fhiruser:change-password" -H 'Content-Type: application/fhir+json' 'https://localhost:9443/fhir-server/api/v4/$import' -d '{
    "resourceType": "Parameters",
    "id": "30321130-5032-49fb-be54-9b8b82b2445a",
    "parameter": [
        {
            "name": "inputFormat",
            "valueString": "application/fhir+ndjson"
        },
        {
            "name": "inputSource",
            "valueUri": "https://localhost:9443/source-fhir-server"
        },
        {
            "name": "input",
            "part": [
                {
                    "name": "type",
                    "valueString": "Patient"
                },
                {
                    "name": "url",
                    "valueUrl": "test-import.ndjson"
                }
            ]
        },
        {
            "name": "storageDetail",
            "valueString": "ibm-cos"
        }
    ]
}'
```

#### Example Response

> The response body is populated only on error, the response status code is 202 and the `content-location` is populated with the polling location, such as the response header:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The response body is populated only on error, the response status code is 202 and the `content-location` is populated with the polling location in a response header:
```

``` sh

> content-location: https://localhost:9443/fhir-server/api/v4/$bulkdata-status?job=JKyViJ5Y0zcqQ2Uv1aBSMw%3D%3D

Reviewer: Should be case-insenstivite, but I think I usually see it like `Content-Location`

```

## Status Operation: $bulkdata-status
The `StatusOperation` is a BulkData Management endpoint, which uses the `Content-Location`'s http query parameter value for job to manage the Bulk Data job request.

There are two custom features - *Poll Job* and *Delete Job*.

### **$bulkdata-status: Poll Job**
The response returned is 202 if the job is queued or not yet complete.

> The response returned is 200 if the job is the job is completed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The response returned is 200 if the job is completed.
```

#### Example
- Request
```sh

> curl 'https://localhost:9443/fhir-server/api/v4/$bulkdata-status?job=FvHrLGPv0oKZNyLzBnY5iA%3D%3D' -k -u "fhiruser:change-password" -v

Reviewer: same as above
```suggestion
curl -k 'https://localhost:9443/fhir-server/api/v4/$bulkdata-status?job=FvHrLGPv0oKZNyLzBnY5iA%3D%3D' -u "fhiruser:change-password" -v
```

"output" : [
  { "type" : "AllergyIntolerance",
      "url": "https://s3.us-south.cloud-object-storage.appdomain.cloud/fhir-bulkimexport-connectathon/6SfXzbGvYl1nTjGbf5qeqJDFNjyljiGdKxXEJb4yJn8=/AllergyIntolerance_1.ndjson",
    "count": 20},
  { "type" : "AllergyIntolerance",
      "url": "https://s3.us-south.cloud-object-storage.appdomain.cloud/fhir-bulkimexport-connectathon/6SfXzbGvYl1nTjGbf5qeqJDFNjyljiGdKxXEJb4yJn8=/AllergyIntolerance_2.ndjson",
    "count": 8},
  { "type" : "Observation",
      "url": "https://s3.us-south.cloud-object-storage.appdomain.cloud/fhir-bulkimexport-connectathon/6SfXzbGvYl1nTjGbf5qeqJDFNjyljiGdKxXEJb4yJn8=/Observation_1.ndjson",
    "count": 234},
  { "type" : "Observation",
      "url": "https://s3.us-south.cloud-object-storage.appdomain.cloud/fhir-bulkimexport-connectathon/6SfXzbGvYl1nTjGbf5qeqJDFNjyljiGdKxXEJb4yJn8=/Observation_2.ndjson",
    "count": 81}]
}
```

- Response for $import upon completion
```sh
{
    "transactionTime": "2020-04-28T13:13:01.366-04:00",
    "request": "$import",
    "requiresAccessToken": false,
    "output": [
        {
            "type": "OperationOutcome",
            "url": "test-import.ndjson_oo_success.ndjson",

>             "count": 3

Reviewer: do we always get OperationOutcome for successfully-imported resources?

Author: Yes, as I understand they do.  Yet, I haven't seen it successfully written, I think it's a policy on the bucket/user I setup.

Reviewer: We agreed to verify this as part of https://github.com/IBM/FHIR/issues/1054

        }
    ],
    "error": [
        {
            "type": "OperationOutcome",
            "url": "test-import.ndjson_oo_errors.ndjson",
            "count": 0
        }
    ]
}
```

### **$bulkdata-status: Delete Job**
The Bulk Data Request is deleted using the Content-Location and executing the `DELETE` method. The deletion of a job is asynchronous - the job is stopped and subsequently deleted.  The data is not cleaned up from the destination storage location - e.g. partially imported data or partially exported data is not cleaned up. 

- Request
```sh

> curl -X DELETE 'https://localhost:9443/fhir-server/api/v4/$bulkdata-status?job=k%2Fd8cTAU%2BUeVEwqURPZ3oA%3D%3D' -k -u "fhiruser:change-password" -v

Reviewer: same
```suggestion
curl -k -v -u "fhiruser:change-password" -X DELETE 'https://localhost:9443/fhir-server/api/v4/$bulkdata-status?job=k%2Fd8cTAU%2BUeVEwqURPZ3oA%3D%3D'
```
